---
date: 2025-03-13
draft: false
authors:
  - peteGSX
categories:
  - DCCEXProtocol
---

# Announcing DCCEXProtocol Library 1.2.0

We've released the latest version of the |DCC-EXP| library version 1.2.0 today.

<!-- more -->

This release adds the ability to read/write CVs on both the main and programming tracks:

- handOffLoco(locoAddress, automationId)

  - Use this to send a loco to an EXRAIL automation.
  - You must enable retrieving routes, and the automationId must match a valid EXRAIL automation ID to work.

- readCV(cv) and validateCV(cv, value)

  - Read or validate a CV for a loco on the programming track.
  - The associated delegate method to implement is receivedValidateCV(int cv, int value) as both return the same response.

- writeLocoAddress(address)

  - Write the provided address to a loco on the programming track.
  - The associated delegate method to implement is receivedWriteLoco(int address).

- validateCVBit(cv, bit, value)

  - Validate the specified bit of a CV for a loco on the programming track.
  - The associated delegate method to implement is receivedValidateCVBit(int cv, int bit, int value).

- writeCV(cv, value)

  - Write a CV to a loco on the programming track.
  - The associated delegate method to implement is receivedWriteCV(int cv, int value).

- writeCVBit(cv, bit, value)

  - Write the specified value to the specified bit of a CV to a loco on the programming track.
  - There is no delegate method to implement for the response for this due to parser limitations, and we recommend writing full CVs.

- writeCVOnMain(address, cv, value)

  - Write to the specified CV to the specified loco on the main track.

- writeCVBitOnMain(address, cv, bit, value)

  - Write to the specified bit and CV to the specified loco on the main track.
